---
type: blog
date: "2022-12-31T16:39:11Z"
author: Jonny Spicer
title: "2023 Goals"
categories:
- Personal
- Featured
series: ["Goals"]
---
It’s the last day of 2022 which means it’s time to reflect on the year past, and set some new goals for 2023! 

Last year I set [six goals.](https://www.notion.so/Blog-adb21ece077c49398dcdb92da2e0b709) I completed two of them (trail running and videogames), and abandoned the other four somewhere around May or June. I feel perfectly at peace about giving up on some of them - it was clear to me that they weren’t providing the value I’d hoped for, and wouldn’t be the best way of spending my resources. In part this is due to [Goodhart’s Law](https://en.wikipedia.org//wiki/Goodhart's_law), something which I only learned about this year, paraphrasable as:

> When a metric becomes a proxy for a hard-to-quantify goal, it ceases to be a good proxy.
> 

The goals I picked were proxies for various things I wanted to improve on this year, and it turned out several of them are bad. Now I am armed with that knowledge, I can try and [mitigate against various issues with optimization-by-proxy.](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/HgiWHaxnAEtg3uEfM/beyond-optimization-by-proxy)

At the highest level, I want to optimize for happiness. I’ve chosen three things as suitable proxies for that; health, progress and novelty. In order to operationalize these, I have chosen a handful of tangible, quantifiable goals, as below. If any of the subgoals stops being a good proxy for their abstract supergoal, then I will gladly give up on it and try and pick something more suitable! Because of this, I don’t anticipate completing all of them - I predict I will finish 3-5, and I will use the first couple of months of the year to explore which ones seem particularly valuable to continue with.

### Health

**Run 3650km this year.** My actual goal is something like “adhere strongly to routine which includes exercises”. I ram 2866km in 2022.

**Complete 12 concrete steps towards improving my eating. Step 1: read “Why we eat too much”, and publish notes.** I’ll post all of these on this site somewhere, and I’ll specify each one once I’ve completed the previous.

**Schedule “slack night’ once per week.** Definition of Slack comes from [Zvi](https://thezvi.wordpress.com/2017/09/30/slack/):

> The absence of binding constraints on behaviour.
> 

See also [Neel Nanda.](https://www.neelnanda.io/blog/38-slack)

### Progress

**Write 12 blog posts (including one fictional), 120 tweets, two [EA forum](https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/) posts.** Here my actual goal is something like “share ideas/thoughts/opinions publicly, get feedback, iterate, have better ideas/truer opinions as a result”.

**Average < 1 hour of screentime per day on my phone, install browser extensions to ban Twitter, Youtube, Manifold during working hours.** The real goal here is “do more deep work”, but this one is particularly hard to operationalize.

W******rite 1200 lines of open-source code.****** I know this is a notoriously poor proxy for developer productivity, but I would like to write more code, so this will have to do. 

### Novelty

**Read books from female authors of 12 different nationalities from Africa, Asia and South America.** Korean and Japanese authors are excluded because I’ve already read several books by them.

**Cook recipes from 12 different cuisines.** British, American, Mexican, Indian, Italian and French are all excluded, because I already semi-regularly cook dishes from these places.

**Try each of the the following at least once:**

- A dance class
- A martial arts class (including boxing)
- Authentic relating
- A yoga class
- A meditation class
- Breathwork
- Maybe other things that I haven’t tried yet - please send me your suggestions!

---

I’ll set up a way to track all of these goals somewhere on this site, to keep me accountable. Wish me luck!